hi
everyone this recording is entitled once
around
k218b part of my Series where I look at
individual astronomical objects of
interest and the
k218b slightly mysteriously refers to
this star and a planet around it the
star is called
k28 and it's a small red dwarf star much
less powerful than the Sun and it's 124
light years away now these red dwarfs
are very common so what is it that's
special about this particular one that
we've
picked well it was studied by the Kepler
space telescope the Kepler space
telescope was sent up with one purpose
in mind and that was to study the
transits of planets that crossed in
front of their star from our line of
sight now this wouldn't happen for every
possible Planet but if we were lucky
then the planet could be seen going
across in front of the star and blocking
some of its
light every time it passed in front the
amount of light would
drop in proportion to the size of the
planet compared to the size of the star
some of the star light would be missing
and in particular we could see regular
dips so if you saw perhaps three
repeated dips at regular intervals then
this might be a planet orbiting around
the
star now the example shown here we've
got just over about
0.5% of the staright dipping down being
blocked out in the three dips here at
regular intervals and that tells us the
uh orbital period the year length of the
planet concerned because we can just
measure that uh period between the dips
that's how long it's taking the planet
to go around very straightforward
really the depth of the
dip also gives us an estimate of the
size of the planet as the planet moves
across in front of the star it will
block a proportion of that light so if
we look at how much by way of percentage
the light has dropped that's the ratio
of the area of the star to the area of
the planet so if the planet's blocking
1% of the light then uh the area of the
black dot is 1% of the area of the whole
of the disc of the star even though we
can see neither of those discs we're
just measuring the total light so here
in this example we've got the same size
Planet going in front of a large sunlike
star or a much smaller star where
clearly it's blocking a higher
proportion of the total light and you
would get the correspondingly different
Siz dips there of course it's the square
area you have to use pi r squar to
calculate the area that will be the
ratio but it's a little bit more
complicated because as you can see in
both the images of the stars there the
central region of the star appears
brighter and you get this phenomenon
called limb darkening as the star moves
as the uh staright is coming from the
edge of the star so the center is
brighter than the edges that makes a
little bit more complicated but if we
account for the limb darkening properly
we can work out the uh radius the
diameter of the planet itself as a
relation to the overall diameter of the
star of course we also need to know the
diameter of the star in order to figure
the out the true size of the
planet but from the period of rotation
the repeat interval of those dips
we can use Kepler's thirdd Law which
tells us that the time squares and that
is proportional to the cube of the
radius so T ^2 is proportional to R
cubed and this all stems from Newton's
law of gravity and his Laws of Motion
it's one of the little derivations that
you can do fairly easily for a circle
for a circular orbit and you can soon
show that t^2 is equal to 4 pi^ 2 over g
m * R cubed 4 pi^ 2 obviously a constant
G is Newton's constant the strength of
gravity and M is the mass and this is
essentially the mass of the central
object the star that's in the
center so having got the period the time
T we can work out the distance that the
object is orbiting around the star if we
know the mass and so so it' be very nice
to actually be able to calculate the
Central Mass
there in the case of the earth you can
plug in One AU and one uh for the
distance and one year for the uh R uh
time taken and easily calculate the mass
of the Sun in the center and we can do
that in other cases as
well what we don't get is the mass of
the planet we get the mass of the
Central object but we can't work out the
mass of the planet by looking at this
that cancels out the planet is of course
Free Falling around in its orbit in the
same way as this astronaut is dropping a
hammer and a feather doesn't matter what
the mass of the object is they will
suffer the same net acceleration in
towards the center of the orbit or the
center of gravity so we can work out the
the mass of the Central Star we can work
out the radius and the the time taken
for the planet to go round we can work
out the size of the planet as
well be very useful of course to know a
bit more about the star the first thing
we can try and do is measure the
distance we can use
parallax using at the Baseline right
across the width of the Earth's orbit we
can see the change in the apparent
position from January to July or anytime
that's 6 months apart the Earth will
have changed position by 300 million
kilometers twice the Earth Sun distance
two astronomical units and the distance
stars are so far away that they don't
appear to move so a nearby star will
move against the background and we can
use that work out the angle do a little
bit of trigonometry and find out the
distance from it with the distance and
how bright the star appears we can work
out what the actual power output of the
star is the standard candle rule a
standard candle twice as far away will
be one quarter as bright one three times
away will will be 1 nth as bright and so
forth so we can soon derive the absolute
power output of the star from The
Parallax meth method if we also study
the spectrum of the star we can figure
out what elements are present obviously
stars are mostly hydrogen uh with a bit
of helium one qu helium 3/4 hydrogen but
they do have some heavier elements in
them some that they picked up when the
star formed out of a cloud of gas and
others that they may have made along the
way that may have been dredged up out of
the core and then from our models of how
stars live and evolve and die we can
make a pretty good good estimate of
where the star is in that process how
old it is what its mass is and what its
diameter
is but if we really want to do this
properly we have to take advantage of
another trick and that is to use the
spectrum of the light and use the
Doppler effect to detect the movement
induced in the Star by the orbiting
planet the planet goes around its big
orbit controlled by the gravity of the
star but the planet pulls on the star a
little bit itself and causes the star to
move around in a tiny Circle as
well and that tiny movement causes the
planet to move back and forth the star
moving back and forth much less from the
point of view of the earth and so if we
look at the Starlight we can see the
elements absorption lines in the
atmosphere of the star and they will
change position shifting back and forth
as the star wobbles around in the little
tiny orbit that it does around the
Common Center of mass and you can see
that uh when it's coming towards us it
will be blue shifted when it's going
away from us it'll be red shifted the
waves are stretched to the red and
compressed to the Blue by that movement
and that was done first with 51 pegasi
which is the data that we have on the
bottom right where there's a nice
sinusoidal wobble backwards and forwards
with a period of 4231 days that's the
planet orbiting very rapidly around its
star giving this induced motion to the
star giving us the Doppler effect and
allowing us to learn more about what's
going on not only does this tell us the
planet is there and the period that the
planet is orbiting on but it tells us
how much the planet is deflecting the
star which can give us the ratio of the
planet's mass
to the star's Mass where the point of
balance is and so now we've got another
handle on the mass now it's a little bit
complicated because if the orbit of the
planet is tilted it might not be
straight on to us if it's straight on in
our line of sight then 100% of the
gravitational effect of the planet on
the star is directed towards us if it's
tilted away from us we will see less
movement along the line of
sight as the star wobbles around and so
actually this method would
underestimate the mass of the planet
what it does give us is a minimum Mass
if the alignment is perfect and in this
particular case the thing is tipped at
60 and a little bit of trig will tell
you that the same wobble will be
observed from the Doppler shift with a
two Jupiter Mass planet in the bottom
example compared to a one Jupiter Mass
planet in the top example just because
of the
sinusoidal angle relationship but if we
have both a Transit going on and the
radial velocity method now we have
everything we
need we know that the Tilt is zero so
the radial velocity is giving us an
accurate measurement of the mass we know
the mass of the star from Kepler's laws
we know the size ratio of the star to
the planet from the amount of light dip
caused as the transit occurs so we've
got the orbit the period the distance
the size of the planet the mass of the
star from the evolutionary models we can
work out what the size of the star is
itself so we've got everything we need
to piece together all the
information and all of that's been done
for the planet B that orbits around this
particular star
k218 it's got a radius of 2.7 times that
of the earth orbits around in 33 days
quite quickly that's corresponds to a
distance of 2 sorry of 21 million kilom
at a uh distance of
0.14 astronomical units the Earth Sun
distance so
14% of the Earth Sun distance that's
really quite close but of course this
star
k218b is a red dwarf star not very
powerful what that tells us further is
that the mass of the planet is eight
times that of the earth and with a
radius of 2.7 if you Cube that up to
calculate the volume you get a number
2.7 to the power 3 is just less than 20
is 19.68 I think I did on my calculator
so we'll call it
20 that means the density 8 divided by
20 is 40% that of the Earth or around 3
G per cubic cm so we've learned quite a
lot about this planet already and it's
interesting to compare that because uh
the planets in our solar system have
various different densities let's have a
look at that the inner planets Mercury
Venus Earth Mars and I've included the
Moon here have quite High
densities they have metal cores iron and
nickel core varying in percentage but
they all have one there's a rocky mantle
overlaying that followed by a thin crust
where the rock is solidified and then we
have perhaps an atmosphere or an ocean
but it really even in the case of Venus
and the Earth that's a very thin
veneer what we get is that the main
planets Venus Mercury Earth they have a
heavy uh consistency a density somewhere
around 5.2 to 5.6 G per cubic cm whereas
the moon and Mars well the Moon is 3.3
Mars is 3.9 so considerably less dense
actually than the the other
three in the outer part of the solar
system we have these giant planets we
have Jupiter Saturn Uranus and Neptune
and they range from
0.7 Which is less dense than water in
the case of Saturn you could float
Saturn if you had a bath large enough
they say slightly fanciful but you get
the idea water would be 1.0 gam per
cubic cm so Saturn very lightweight very
low density in
comparison Jupiter a little bit denser
and then the outer ice giants Uranus and
Neptune it's up to about 1.7 so slightly
more dense than the the other two but
nevertheless compared to the the density
of our particular Cas in point of
k218b doesn't really fit and I've
Illustrated there what we think these
various layers are made of we think that
there is probably a core of uh metal or
Rock right in the center of these giant
planets followed by a layer of hydrogen
maybe met
hydrogen due to the enormous pressure
and then perhaps the Light Elements
hydrogen and helium with some other
volatile materials like water ammonia
and more methane there making up a lot
of that envelope of uh uh relatively
volatile and low density material has to
be that in order to give us this low
density
total so
k218b at
2.67 that's less dense certainly less
dense than Mercury Venus and the Earth
even less dense than the moon or Mars
but more dense than the Gas Giants and
the ice giants and this suggests it's
got a combination of uh some light
materials water and other volatiles over
a fairly substantial Rocky core Rocky
metal center to it so one of the ideas
for this was that it might be quite a
large large Central core and crust Rocky
Metal Zone and then an ocean of water
over it so it might be an ocean World
perhaps with some layers of ice where
the very high pressures at the bottom of
the ocean might compress the water so
much that it would form ice and then an
En envelope of atmospheric gases over
the top of that so an ocean World a
super Earth Ocean World this was the
original uh proposal for
k218b but you could make that density in
various ways you could have a rocky
world with a
hydrogen gas envelope around it perhaps
a mixture of hydrogen and helium the
primordial gases over a rocky planet
with no water so a rocky World
essentially you could have a mini
Neptune with a large amount of uh ises
overlaying the iron and Rock core and
then a hydrogen helium atmosphere over
the top of it or you could have a
combination of the two where you had a
relatively modest inner and outer core
of rock and iron and then a lot of
ice perhaps with some water and then a
hydrogen envelope around it and the word
hean world has been coined for this
combination of hydrogen and ocean so
it's there's other Poss possibilities
that we need to
explore so what of k218b well one of the
things we can calculate for the planet
is how hot it's likely to be it's just
14% of the Earth's distance from the
Star but the star is much cooler so the
proximity brings the temperature to a
reasonable level compared to Earth 94%
of the Heat
reaching the surface compared to Earth
so much closer to a cooler
fire that suggests a base temperature
somewhere around -8 to + 5 Centigrade
so just below or above the freezing
point of water at atmospheric pressure
but we're not allowing there for any
Greenhouse Effect and with the Earth we
would get a similar low temperature if
we did not have the water water vapor in
our atmosphere plus the car dioxide and
certain amount of methane brings the
temperature up to the present levels
that we're seeing um and obviously more
carbon dioxide is gradually increasing
that so this world is likely to have a
lot more uh water or other gases that we
would need to contend to that will make
it warmer than
that but how can we find out well the
trick is to scan for alien
sunsets as the planet transits in front
of the star not only is the solid chunk
of the planet blocking the light but the
outer atmosphere of the planet is
filtering the light through we would see
if we could look close enough the dis of
the star we would
see the black dis of the planet but
around it we would see a layer which
would essentially be the sunset coming
through the atmosphere and out the other
side this same sort of effect occurs
with the Earth and the moon at a total
lunar eclipse the Moon Turns blood red
because the light of Earth's sunsets
gets through and is cast upon the moon
so we would be able to look at this
during the transits of course we know
when they are going to be they're very
predictable so what we do is look to see
how the spectrum of the light from the
com combined planet star system
changes what we can do is look when the
planet Goes Around The Far Side of the
star and we know we're getting pure star
light and we can take the Spectrum then
we can then look as the planet comes in
front of the Star as it crosses we can
watch very carefully to see how the
atmosphere is letting some wavelengths
through and blocking others the total
light will be down because of the solid
part of the planet blocking a a chunk of
the light and if we can correct for that
and look in different wavebands we can
see
different obscuration different uh
diminution of the amount of light from
the different elements the different
wave bands corresponding to the
different molecules so water carbon
monoxide carbon dioxide all absorb light
different frequencies we could trace
those in the
atmosphere and this has been done by the
Hubble Space Telescope for
k218b and what it discovered was a lot
of
water it said that there was about 50%
of the atmosphere seemed to consist of
water so very very rich in water vapor
Steam and all of that water vapor
certainly would be bringing the
temperature way up water is an
exceptionally good GRE greenhouse gas so
this would not be a cold world at all
this would be very very warm and
steamy well Hubble did that a few years
ago and just recently the experiment has
been repeated with the James web Space
Telescope and this has had a much deeper
look and by deeper I mean it's gone
further into the infrared part of the
spectrum as well as being more sensitive
the Hubble Space Telescope could go all
the way from 90 nanom in the ultraviolet
down through the blue green red part of
the spectrum at 700 and down into the
infrared down to 2,500 nanometers in the
long wavelengths and so it could see the
heat radiation and the infrared coming
to
it and take the spectrum of
that James Webb can go
further it can go all the way down to
28,500 NM actually it can only go to 600
nanm in the visible part of the spectrum
so it's not very sensitive to uh short
wavelength visible light green or blue
um and it can't see ultraviolet at
all but that lower part that deep red
and
infrared part of the spectrum is where
all the good stuff lies all the details
in the Spectrum are the excellent places
to go and identify molecule
vibrations and rotations of molecules
happen to occur at those frequencies and
so this is an excellent place to
look so what the jwst found was that the
atmosphere seemed to be devoid of water
it was very dry and we think that the
peak that Hubble was seeing was perhaps
actually due to an absorption mode of
methane so we could say that jwst found
Hubble to be wrong and the Hubble Peak
based on just one observational dip in
the Spectrum one peak in the Spectrum
was probably just
methane however it's not quite that
simple because jwst is probably looking
at cooler material higher up in the
atmosphere of the planet and uh in fact
Hubble would have been looking at warmer
layers deeper inside and even on Earth
there's a lot of water vapor in the
lower atmosphere but the upper
atmosphere is very dry so was a little
bit of a debate going on about exactly
whether these two results are in
conflict or whether we were looking at
different layers of the atmosphere be
fascinating once that's
settled so what did we find well here's
the Spectrum going from 1,000 nanometers
in the infrared down to 5,000
this is the uh spectrum that was
received and it's been labeled up
according to the different Peaks that we
saw from the different molecules so lots
of methane several different Peaks for
methane carbon
dioxide and also a couple of Peaks from
dimethy sulfide
DMS well DMS is interesting it's a very
uh smelly
molecule it's a methy group
ch3 joined to a a sulfur joined to
another methy group as Illustrated there
with a yellow sulfur the two black
carbons and three hydrogens on each end
and I say smelly because actually many
sulfur-based organic compounds are
smelly indeed U you will be familiar
with hydrogen sulfide bad eggs but some
of the mo most smelly substances known
to man things like methyl mapan have a
sulfur atom in them
but of course we're not smelling it
we're seeing the vibrations of the uh
molecule as it stretches and rotates and
we're seeing those in the
Spectrum now we're only talking about
going down to 5,000 nanometers here I'll
say more about that in a
moment if we think about dimethy sulfide
though on Earth it is only produced by
light by life rather only one source of
the infrared light absorption band on
Earth and that is caused by life
releasing dimethy sulfide into the
atmosphere it is not produced by any
inorganic natural process other than by
living
creatures the first of which is plankton
Plankton living in the ocean are a prime
source of DMS in our atmosphere and they
have to keep refreshing it because the
oxygen in the atmosphere will get get at
this stuff and destroy it quite quickly
so it has to be being pumped into the
atmosphere continually so we're talking
live Plankton here and the other source
is people cooking cabbages so what we're
really saying here is that there's a
good chance that this dimethy sulfide is
either from an ocean full of some sort
of alien Plankton or there are a lot of
cabbage eaters on K
18b well I suspect it's probably the
former but we just don't
know is it plausible that these hean
worlds these hydrogen envelope ocean
worlds might can be conducive to
supporting life well on Earth we think
that black smokers down at the bottom of
the ocean are probably where life came
from there's a heat low down in the
water minerals carbon dioxide everything
you need in order for life to begin and
start cooking up the very basic elements
and molecules needed to create some sort
of uh living
system but inside these much larger much
more massive Worlds the water could be
under such extreme pressure that
actually its ice the the high pressure
even if it's a bit warm might compress
it but there will still be volcanic heat
emanating from the center of the planet
out breaking that ice up breaking
through it melting through it so it's
entirely possible that there are some
equivalent of these black smokers down
there somewhere so I think this is a
pretty good uh probability but we're
going to need to follow up with a lot
more
detail and one of the next steps is to
use the rest of the capability of James
web it only looked in the near infrared
band of the 600 nanometer to 5,000
nanometer band The far infrared camera
was not used and it's the far infrared
camera that takes us all the rest of the
way out to 2,800
nanometers and that will give us a lot
more information about the atmospheric
composition we'll see many more Peaks
we'll be able to confirm whether or not
DMS is present measure how much of it it
is because the detection at the moment
is I think tentative it's only at the
two Sigma um confidence level that's
quite low and sometimes two Sigma
detections go away with future
observations so personally I can't wait
I'm really looking forward to getting an
update on this one and as soon as I do
watch this space I'll share it with you
because maybe this is the first time we
we detected a bio signature on a planet
orbiting a star not the Sun so quite an
incredible
development well I hope you've enjoyed
my once around of
k218b and please subscribe like do
whatever you want have a look at some of
the other videos particular recent ones
have been once around Tower setti
talking about exoplanets around some of
our nearby Stars Epsilon eridani as well
40er adani the supposed home of Mr Spock
and Planet Vulcan so have a look at
those have a bit of fun I I hope you
enjoy them thanks very much